Add IQS003 rule (#2366)
home-assistant/developers.home-assistant: docs/core/integration-quality-scale/rules/iqs003.md

---
title: "IQS003 - Don't allow the same device or service to be able to be set up twice"
---

IQS003 is as follows:

Don't allow the same device or service to be able to be set up twice

## Reasoning

> Since integrations are easy to setup with the UI, it could occur that the user accidentally sets up the same device or service twice.
> This can lead to duplicated devices and entities with colliding unique identifiers, which has all kinds of negative side effects.
> Making sure a config entry is uniquely identifiable is also important for any discovery flows, as otherwise they would discover devices that already have been setup.
> 
> Because we want to prevent this from happening, we need to make sure that the user can only set up a device or service once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since integrations are easy to set up with the UI, the user could accidentally set up the same device or service twice.
This can lead to duplicated devices and entities with unique identifiers colliding, which has negative side effects.
Any discovery flow must also ensure that a config entry is uniquely identifiable, as otherwise, it would discover devices already set up.

To prevent this, we need to ensure that the user can only set up a device or service once.
```

## Example implementation

> There are 2 common ways an integration checks if it already has been setup.
> The first way is by assigning a unique_id to the configuration entry.
> The second way is by checking if pieces of the data in the configuration entry is unique.
> 
> The following examples show how to implement these checks in a config flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are 2 common ways an integration checks if it has already been set up.
The first way is by assigning a `unique_id` to the configuration entry.
The second way is by checking if pieces of the data in the configuration entry are unique.

The following examples show how to implement these checks in a config flow.
```

### Unique identifier

> The first way is by assigning a zunique_id` to the configuration entry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first way is by assigning a `unique_id` to the configuration entry.
```

> This unique ID is unique per domain, so another domain can use the same unique ID without problems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This unique ID is unique per integration domain, so another integration can use the same unique ID without problems.
```

> Below is an example of a config flow that fetches the `unique_id` from the configuration entry and checks if it already exists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below is an example of a config flow that fetches the `unique_id` for the entered configuration with the client and checks if it already exists.
```

> The first way is by assigning a unique_id to the configuration entry.
> This unique_id is unique per domain, so another domain can use the same unique_id without problems.
> Below is an example of a config flow that fetches the unique_id from the configuration entry and checks if it already exists.
> If it does, the flow will abort and show an error message to the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first way is by assigning a zunique_id` to the configuration entry.
This unique ID is unique per domain, so another domain can use the same unique ID without problems.
Below is an example of a config flow that fetches the `unique_id` from the configuration entry and checks if it already exists.
If it does, the flow will abort and show an error message to the user.
```

`config_flow.py`:
```python
    async def async_step_user(
        self, user_input: dict[str, Any] | None = None
    ) -> ConfigFlowResult:
        """Handle a flow initialized by the user."""
        errors: dict[str, str] = {}
        if user_input:
            client = MyClient(user_input[CONF_HOST])
            try:
                identifier = await client.get_identifier()
            except MyException:
                errors["base"] = "cannot_connect"

>             except Exception:  # noqa: BLE001

Reviewer: Unknown exceptions should be logged.

                errors["base"] = "unknown"
            else:
                await self.async_set_unique_id(identifier)
                self._abort_if_unique_id_configured()
                return self.async_create_entry(
                    title="MyIntegration",
                    data=user_input,
                )
        return self.async_show_form(
            step_id="user",

>             data_schema=vol.Schema({vol.Required(CONF_HOST): str}),

Reviewer: In case of an host, should we show off the selector format here?

            errors=errors,
        )
```

### Unique data

The second way is by checking if pieces of the data in the configuration entry are unique.
In the following example, the user fills in a host and port.

> If a configuration entry already exists for the same host, the flow will abort and show an error message to the user.

Reviewer 2: If we're using host and port in the example we should include both to be unique since that's almost always what the integration should do. If we want to limit the unique check to one item we should use another example.
```suggestion
If a configuration entry already exists for the same host and port, the flow will abort and show an error message to the user.
```

Author: I mostly wanted to create a scenario where you need to pass a custom object in async abort entries match instead of just user input

Reviewer 2: Yes, but then we should use different example than host and port.

> The second way is by checking if pieces of the data in the configuration entry is unique.
> In the following example, the user fills in a host and port.
> If there already is a configuration entry with the same host, the flow will abort and show an error message to the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second way is by checking if pieces of the data in the configuration entry are unique.
In the following example, the user fills in a host and port.
If a configuration entry already exists for the same host, the flow will abort and show an error message to the user.
```

`config_flow.py`:
```python
    async def async_step_user(
        self, user_input: dict[str, Any] | None = None
    ) -> ConfigFlowResult:
        """Handle a flow initialized by the user."""
        errors: dict[str, str] = {}
        if user_input:

>             self._async_abort_entries_match({CONF_HOST: user_input[CONF_HOST]})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            self._async_abort_entries_match(user_input)
```

            client = MyClient(user_input[CONF_HOST], user_input[CONF_PORT])
            try:
                await client.get_data()
            except MyException:
                errors["base"] = "cannot_connect"
            except Exception:  # noqa: BLE001

>                 errors["base"] = "unknown"

Reviewer: Missing logging

            else:
                return self.async_create_entry(
                    title="MyIntegration",
                    data=user_input,
                )
        return self.async_show_form(
            step_id="user",
            data_schema=vol.Schema(
                {
                    vol.Required(CONF_HOST): str,

>                     vol.Required(CONF_PORT): int,

Reviewer: Same, should we show selector usage here?

### Unique identifier

The first way is by assigning a `unique_id` to the configuration entry.
This unique ID is unique per integration domain, so another integration can use the same unique ID without problems.

> Below is an example of a config flow that fetches the `unique_id` for the entered configuration with the client and checks if it already exists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below is an example of a config flow that fetches the `unique_id` for the entered configuration with the client and checks if the `unique_id` already exists.
```
